Install guide for ambient multi network (#16709)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ambient/install/multicluster/_index.md

**Universal waypoint deployments are assumed across clusters**
  - All clusters must have identically named waypoint deployments
  - Waypoint configurations must be synchronized manually across clusters (e.g. using Flux, ArgoCD, or similar tools)
  - Traffic routing relies on consistent waypoint naming conventions

#### Service Visibility and Scoping

**Service scope configurations are not read from across clusters**
  - Only the local cluster's service scope configuration is used as the source of truth
  - Remote cluster service scopes are not respected, which can lead to unexpected traffic behavior
  - Cross-cluster service discovery may not respect intended service boundaries

**If a service's waypoint is marked as global, that service will also be global**
  - This can lead to unintended cross-cluster traffic if not managed carefully

#### Gateway Limitations

**Ambient east-west gateways currently only support meshed mTLS traffic**
  - Cannot currently expose `istiod` across networks using ambient east-west gateways. You can still use a classic e/w gateway for this.

{{< tip >}}
As ambient multicluster matures, many of these limitations will be addressed.

> Check the [Istio release notes](https://istio.io/news/) for updates on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the [Istio release notes](https://istio.io/latest/news/) for updates on
```

Reviewer 2: Done, and updated the linting

weight: 40
aliases:
    - /docs/ambient/kubernetes/multicluster-install/
    - /docs/ambient/kubernetes/multicluster/
    - /docs/ambient/kubernetes/install/multicluster/
    - /docs/ambient/install/multicluster/gateways/
    - /docs/ambient/install/multicluster/shared/
keywords: [kubernetes,multicluster]
simple_list: true
content_above: true
test: table-of-contents
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
---

{{< boilerplate alpha >}}

Follow this guide to install an Istio {{< gloss "ambient" >}}ambient service mesh{{< /gloss >}}
that spans multiple {{< gloss "cluster" >}}clusters{{< /gloss >}}.

## Current Status and Limitations

{{< warning >}}
**Ambient multicluster is currently in alpha status** and has significant limitations.
This feature is under active development and should not be used in production environments.
{{< /warning >}}

Before proceeding with ambient multicluster installation, it's critical to understand
the current state and limitations of this feature:

### Supported Configurations

Currently, ambient multicluster **only supports**:
- **Multi-network topologies** with multiple primary clusters

> - **Double HBONE encapsulation** for cross-cluster traffic

Reviewer 3: Sorry I'm a bit late to the party.

> - **Multi-network topologies** with multiple primary clusters
More accurately, each cluster has to be a primary cluster (have its own istiod). If you have 10 clusters but only two primary cluster, then you would have "multiply primary clusters" but this topology would not be supported.

> - **Double HBONE encapsulation** for cross-cluster traffic

Can we configure the this at all? is there any way for someone to try any other inner/outer tunnel protocol configuration. If not, then I think we can omit this.

Author: > More accurately, each cluster has to be a primary cluster (have its own istiod). If you have 10 clusters but only two primary cluster, then you would have "multiply primary clusters" but this topology would not be supported.

Totally agree - good clarification

> Can we configure the this at all? is there any way for someone to try any other inner/outer tunnel protocol configuration. If not, then I think we can omit this.

Even if we don't support other configurations, it might be good to explicitly clarify we currently don't support protocols other than double hbone. I could be convinced either way.

Reviewer 2: I took a stab at rewording; let me know your thoughts

> - **Universal waypoint deployments** across all clusters with identical names

Reviewer 3: waypoint deployment or configuration? You don't have to deploy waypoints in all clusters, but maybe we do want to require this to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 3: Yes, but the services also have the same waypoints across clusters

Reviewer 3: I guess we talk about it later

### Critical Limitations

#### Network Topology Restrictions
- **Multi-cluster single-network configurations are untested, broken, and pre-experimental**
  - Do not attempt to deploy ambient across clusters that share the same network
  - Only multi-network configurations are supported

#### Control Plane Limitations  
- **Primary with multiple remotes is not currently supported**

>   - You can only have one primary cluster and one remote cluster

Reviewer 4: presumably multi-primary is supported?

Author: I lifted this from https://github.com/istio/istio.io/issues/16693. I should clarify that multi primary is supported and primary remote is unsupported

  - Configurations with one or more remote clusters will not work correctly

#### Waypoint Requirements
- **Universal waypoint deployments are assumed across clusters**
  - All clusters must have identically named waypoint deployments
  - Waypoint configurations must be synchronized manually across clusters
  - Traffic routing relies on consistent waypoint naming conventions

> #### Service Visibility and Scoping

Reviewer 3: The locality of services with waypoints is also confusing and worth mentioning. Like if service is local, but its waypoint service is labeled as global, then it is global.

- **Service scopes are not read from across clusters**
  - Only the local cluster's service scope configuration is used as the source of truth

>   - Remote cluster service scopes are ignored, which can lead to unexpected traffic behavior

Author: I should clarify that I mean "service scope configuration is not read from across clusters". The matching criteria for namespace and services labels is assumed to be same across all clusters.

>   - Remote cluster service scopes are ignored, which can lead to unexpected traffic behavior

Reviewer 2: Yes that's correct; the labels of remote services are compared to the local cluster's meshconfig/service scope, NOT the service scope of the remote service's cluster

---
title: Install Multicluster
description: Install an Istio mesh in ambient mode across multiple Kubernetes clusters.
weight: 40
aliases:
    - /docs/ambient/kubernetes/multicluster-install/
    - /docs/ambient/kubernetes/multicluster/
    - /docs/ambient/kubernetes/install/multicluster/
    - /docs/ambient/install/multicluster/gateways/
    - /docs/ambient/install/multicluster/shared/
keywords: [kubernetes,multicluster]
simple_list: true
content_above: true
test: table-of-contents
owner: istio/wg-environments-maintainers
---

{{< boilerplate alpha >}}

Follow this guide to install an Istio {{< gloss "ambient" >}}ambient service mesh{{< /gloss >}}
that spans multiple {{< gloss "cluster" >}}clusters{{< /gloss >}}.

## Current Status and Limitations

{{< warning >}}
**Ambient multicluster is currently in alpha status** and has significant limitations.
This feature is under active development and should not be used in production environments.
{{< /warning >}}

> Before proceeding with ambient multicluster installation, it's critical to understand
> the current state and limitations of this feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding with an ambient multicluster installation, it is critical to understand
the current state and limitations of this feature.
```

**Multi-cluster single-network configurations are untested, and may be broken**
  - Use caution when deploying ambient across clusters that share the same network
  - Only multi-network configurations are supported

#### Control Plane Limitations

**Primary remote configuration is not currently supported**
  - You can only have multiple primary clusters
  - Configurations with one or more remote clusters will not work correctly

#### Waypoint Requirements

**Universal waypoint deployments are assumed across clusters**
  - All clusters must have identically named waypoint deployments
  - Waypoint configurations must be synchronized manually across clusters (e.g. using Flux, ArgoCD, or similar tools)
  - Traffic routing relies on consistent waypoint naming conventions

#### Service Visibility and Scoping

**Service scope configurations are not read from across clusters**
  - Only the local cluster's service scope configuration is used as the source of truth
  - Remote cluster service scopes are not respected, which can lead to unexpected traffic behavior
  - Cross-cluster service discovery may not respect intended service boundaries

#### Gateway Limitations

> **Ambient east-west gateways only support double HBONE**

Reviewer: I have not been told what this is

Reviewer 2: Yeah agreed this isn't the right place for this terminology. Reworded
